uberculosis, fungi, parasites, or other germs, abscesses can develop as a complication. • Liver abscess. Bacteria or amoeba from the intestines can spread through the blood to the liver and cause abscesses. • Psoas abscess. Deep in the back of the abdomen on either side of the lumbar spine lie the psoas muscles. They flex the hips. An abscess can develop in one of these muscles, usually when it spreads from the appen- dix, the large bowel, or the fallopian tubes. Diagnosis The common findings of inflammation—heat, red- ness, swelling, and pain—easily identify superficial abscesses. Abscesses in other places may produce only generalized symptoms such as fever and discomfort. If the patient’s symptoms and physical examination do not help, a physician may have to resort to a battery of tests to KEY TERMS Cellulitis—Inflammation of tissue due to infection. Enzyme—Any of a number of protein chemicals that can change other chemicals. Fallopian tubes—Part of the internal female anato- my that carries eggs from the ovaries to the uterus. Flora—Living inhabitants of a region or area. Pyogenic—Capable of generating pus. Streptococ- cus, Staphocococcus , and bowel bacteria are the primary pyogenic organisms. Sebaceous glands—Tiny structures in the skin that produce oil (sebum). If they become plugged, sebum collects inside and forms a nurturing place for germs to grow. Septicemia —The spread of an infectious agent throughout the body by means of the blood stream. Sinus—A tubular channel connecting one body part with another or with the outside. locate the site of an abscess, but usually something in the initial evaluation directs the search. Recent or chronic dis- ease in an organ suggests it may be the site of an abscess. Dysfunction of an organ or system—for instance, seizures or altered bowel function—may provide the clue. Pain and tenderness on physical examination are common findings. Sometimes a deep abscess will eat a small chan- nel (sinus) to the surface and begin lea