ts in a yellow tint to the skin, eyes and body fluids. Bile retention in the liver, gallbladder and pancreas is the immediate cause, but the underlying cause could be as simple as obstruction of the common bile duct by a gall- stone or as serious as pancreatic cancer. Ultrasound can distinguish between these conditions. Malignant—The term literally means growing worse and resisting treatment. It is used as a synonym for cancerous and connotes a harmful condition that generally is life-threatening. Morphology—Literally, the study of form. In medi- cine, morphology refers to the size, shape and structure rather than the function of a given organ. As a diagnostic imaging technique, ultrasound facil- itates the recognition of abnormal morphologies as symptoms of underlying conditions. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 3 Abdominal ultrasound GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 3 Higher frequency ultrasound waves produce more detailed images, but are also more readily absorbed and so cannot penetrate as deeply into the body. Abdominal ultrasound imaging is generally performed at frequencies between 2-5 MHz. An ultrasound machine consists of two parts: the transducer and the analyzer. The transducer both produces the sound waves that penetrate the body and receives the reflected echoes. Transducers are built around piezoelec- tric ceramic chips. (Piezoelectric refers to electricity that is produced when you put pressure on certain crystals such as quartz). These ceramic chips react to electric puls- es by producing sound waves ( they are transmitting waves) and react to sound waves by producing electric pulses (receiving). Bursts of high frequency electric puls- es supplied to the transducer causes it to produce the scanning sound waves. The transducer then receives the returning echoes, translates them back into electric pulses and sends them to the analyzer—a computer that orga- nizes the data into an image on a television screen. Because sound waves travel throug