n often find themselves in emotional turmoil when deciding if an abortion is a procedure they wish to under- go. Pre-abortion counseling is important in helping a woman resolve any questions she may have about having the procedure. Aftercare Regardless of the method used to perform the abor- tion, a woman will be observed for a period of time to make sure her blood pressure is stable and that bleeding is controlled. The doctor may prescribe antibiotics to reduce the chance of infection. Women who are Rh nega- tive (lacking genetically determined antigens in their red blood cells that produce immune responses) should be given a human Rh immune globulin (RhoGAM) after the procedure unless the father of the fetus is also Rh nega- tive. This prevents blood incompatibility complications in future pregnancies. Bleeding will continue for about five days in a surgical abortion and longer in a medical abortion. To decrease the risk of infection, a woman should avoid intercourse and not use tampons and douches for two weeks after the abortion. A follow-up visit is a necessary part of the woman’s aftercare. Contraception will be offered to women who wish to avoid future pregnancies, because menstrual periods normally resume within a few weeks. Risks Serious complications resulting from abortions per- formed before 13 weeks are rare. Of the 90% of women who have abortions in this time period, 2.5% have minor complications that can be handled without hospitaliza- tion. Less than 0.5% have complications that require a hospital stay. The rate of complications increases as the pregnancy progresses. Complications from abortions can include: • uncontrolled bleeding • infection • blood clots accumulating in the uterus • a tear in the cervix or uterus • missed abortion where the pregnancy continues • incomplete abortion where some material from the pregnancy remains in the uterus Women who experience any of the following symp- toms of post-abortion complications should call the clin- i