or any medical condition, and to discuss information obtained from this book with their health care provider. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 VII PLEASE READ—IMPORTANT INFORMATION The Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 (GEM2) is a one-stop source for medical information on nearly 1,700 common medical disorders, conditions, tests, and treat- ments, including high-profile diseases such as AIDS, Alzheimer’s disease, cancer, and heart attack. This ency- clopedia avoids medical jargon and uses language that laypersons can understand, while still providing thor- ough coverage of each topic. The Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 fills a gap between basic consumer health resources, such as single-volume family medical guides, and highly technical professional materials. SCOPE Almost 1,700 full-length articles are included in the Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 , including disorders/ conditions, tests/procedures, and treatments/therapies. Many common drugs are also covered, with generic drug names appearing first and brand names following in parentheses, eg. acetaminophen (Tylenol). Throughout the Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 , many prominent individuals are highlighted as sidebar biographies that accompany the main topical essays. Articles follow a standardized format that provides information at a glance. Rubrics include: Disorders/Conditions Tests/Treatments Definition Definition Description Purpose Causes and symptoms Precautions Diagnosis Description Treatment Preparation Alternative treatment Aftercare Prognosis Risks Prevention Normal/Abnormal results Resources Resources Key terms Key terms In recent years there has been a resurgence of interest in holistic medicine that emphasizes the connection between mind and body. Aimed at achieving and main- taining good health rather than just eliminating disease, this approach has come to be known as alternative medi- cine. The Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 includes a number of essays on alternative therapies, ranging from tra