05. (212) 248-1111. <http://www.agi-usa.org>. Meghan M. Gourley Abortion, spontaneous see Miscarriage Abortion, therapeutic Definition Therapeutic abortion is the intentional termination of a pregnancy before the fetus can live independently. Abortion has been a legal procedure in the United States since 1973. Purpose An abortion may be performed whenever there is some compelling reason to end a pregnancy. Women have abortions because continuing the pregnancy would cause them hardship, endanger their life or health, or because prenatal testing has shown that the fetus will be born with severe abnormalities. Abortions are safest when performed within the first six to 10 weeks after the last menstrual period. The cal- culation of this date is referred to as the gestational age and is used in determining the stage of pregnancy. For example, a woman who is two weeks late having her period is said to be six weeks pregnant, because it is six weeks since she last menstruated. About 90% of women who have abortions do so before 13 weeks and experience few complications. Abortions performed between 13-24 weeks have a higher KEY TERMS Multi-fetal pregnancy —A pregnancy of two or more fetuses. Selective reduction—Typically referred to in cases of multifetal pregnancy, when one or more fetuses are aborted to preserve the viability of the remain- ing fetuses and decrease health risks to the mother. rate of complications. Abortions after 24 weeks are extremely rare and are usually limited to situations where the life of the mother is in danger. Precautions Most women are able to have abortions at clinics or outpatient facilities if the procedure is performed early in pregnancy. Women who have stable diabetes, controlled epilepsy, mild to moderate high blood pressure, or who are HIV positive can often have abortions as outpatients if precautions are taken. Women with heart disease, pre- vious endocarditis, asthma, lupus erythematosus, uter- ine fibroid tumors, blood clotting disord