rd- ing the proper dose of pills to take, as it depends on the GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 9 Abortion, therapeutic GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 9 brand of birth control pill. Not all birth control pills will work for emergency contraception. Menstrual extractions are safe, but because the amount of fetal material is so small at this stage of devel- opment, it is easy to miss. This results in an incomplete abortion that means the pregnancy continues. First trimester abortions The first trimester of pregnancy includes the first 13 weeks after the last menstrual period. In the United States, about 90% of abortions are performed during this period. It is the safest time in which to have an abortion, and the time in which women have the most choice of how the procedure is performed. MEDICAL ABORTIONS. Medical abortions are brought about by taking medications that end the pregnancy. The advantages of a first trimester medical abortion are: • The procedure is non-invasive; no surgical instruments are used. • Anesthesia is not required. • Drugs are administered either orally or by injection. • The procedure resembles a natural miscarriage. Disadvantages of a medical abortion are: • The effectiveness decreases after the seventh week. • The procedure may require multiple visits to the doctor. • Bleeding after the abortion lasts longer than after a sur- gical abortion. • The woman may see the contents of her womb as it is expelled. Two different medications can be used to bring about an abortion. Methotrexate (Rheumatrex) works by stop- ping fetal cells from dividing which causes the fetus to die. On the first visit to the doctor, the woman receives an injection of methotrexate. On the second visit, about a week later, she is given misoprostol (Cytotec), an oxygenated unsaturated cyclic fatty acid responsible for various hormonal reactions such as muscle contraction (prostaglandin), that stimulates contractions of the uterus. Within two weeks, the woman wil