c- tion, refers to choosing to abort a fetus, typically in a multi-fetal pregnancy, to decrease the health risks to the mother in carrying and giving birth to more than one or two babies, and also to decrease the risk of complications to the remaining fetus(es). The term selective abortion also refers to choosing to abort a fetus for reasons such as the woman is carrying a fetus which likely will be born with some birth defect or impairment, or because the sex of the fetus is not preferred by the individual. Purpose A woman may decide to abort for health reasons, for example, she is at higher risk for complications during preg- nancy because of a disorder or disease such as diabetes. However, selective reduction is recommended often in cases of multi-fetal pregnancy, or the presence of more than one fetus, typically, at least three or more fetuses. In the general population, multi-fetal pregnancy happens in only about 1-2% of pregnant women. But multi-fetal pregnan- cies occur far more often in women using fertility drugs. Precautions Because women or couples who use fertility drugs have made an extra effort to become pregnant, it is possi- ble that the individuals may be unwilling or uncomfort- able with the decision to abort a fetus in cases of multi- fetal pregnancy. Individuals engaging in fertility treat- ment should be made aware of the risk of multi-fetal pregnancy and consider the prospect of recommended reduction before undergoing fertility treatment. Description Selective reduction is usually performed between nine and 12 weeks of pregnancy and is most successful when performed in early pregnancy. It is a simple proce- dure and can be performed on an outpatient basis. A nee- dle is inserted into the woman’s stomach or vagina and potassium chloride is injected into the fetus. Preparation Individuals who have chosen selective reduction to safeguard the remaining fetuses should be counseled prior to the procedure. Individuals should receive infor- mation rega