ecessary drugs and chemicals—especially tobacco— and other elements of a healthy lifestyle. Resources PERIODICALS Dunn, J. C., and E. W. Fonkalsrud. “Improved Survival of Infants with Omphalocele.”American Journal of Surgery 173 (April 1997): 284-7. Langer, J. C. “Gastroschisis and Omphalocele.”Seminars in Pediatric Surgery5 (May 1996): 124-8. J. Ricker Polsdorfer, MD Abnormal heart rhythms see Arrhythmias ABO blood typing see Blood typing and crossmatching ABO incompatibility see Erythroblastosis fetalis Abortion, habitual see Recurrent miscarriage Abortion, partial birth Definition Partial birth abortion is a method of late-term abor- tion that terminates a pregnancy and results in the death and intact removal of a fetus. This procedure is most commonly referred to as intact dilatation and extraction (D & X). Purpose Partial birth abortion, or D&X, is performed to end a pregnancy and results in the death of a fetus, typically in GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 26 Abortion, partial birth GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 6 the late second or third trimester. Although D&X is high- ly controversial, some physicians argue that it has advan- tages that make it a preferable procedure in some circum- stances. One perceived advantage is that the fetus is removed largely intact, allowing for better evaluation and autopsy of the fetus in cases of known fetal anomalies. Intact removal of the fetus may also confer a lower risk of puncturing the uterus or damaging the cervix. Another perceived advantage is that D&X ends the pregnancy without requiring the woman to go through labor, which may be less emotionally traumatic than other methods of late-term abortion. In addition, D&X may offer a lower cost and shorter procedure time. Precautions Women considering D&X should be aware of the highly controversial nature of this procedure. A contro- versy common to all late-term abortions is whether the fetus is viable, or able to survive outside of the woman’s body. A specifi