re- vious endocarditis, asthma, lupus erythematosus, uter- ine fibroid tumors, blood clotting disorders, poorly con- trolled epilepsy, or some psychological disorders usually need to be hospitalized in order to receive special moni- toring and medications during the procedure. Description V ery early abortions Between five and seven weeks, a pregnancy can be ended by a procedure called menstrual extraction. This procedure is also sometimes called menstrual regulation, mini-suction, or preemptive abortion. The contents of the uterus are suctioned out through a thin (3-4 mm) plastic tube that is inserted through the undilated cervix. Suction is applied either by a bulb syringe or a small pump. Another method is called the “morning after” pill, or emergency contraception . Basically, it involves taking high doses of birth control pills within 24 to 48 hours of having unprotected sex. The high doses of hormones causes the uterine lining to change so that it will not sup- port a pregnancy. Thus, if the egg has been fertilized, it is simply expelled from the body. There are two types of emergency contraception. One type is identical to ordinary birth control pills, and uses the hormones estrogen and progestin). This type is available with a prescription under the brand name Pre- ven. But women can even use their regular birth control pills for emergency contraception, after they check with their doctor about the proper dose. About half of women who use birth control pills for emergency contraception get nauseated and 20 percent vomit. This method cuts the risk of pregnancy 75 percent. The other type of morning-after pill contains only one hormone: progestin, and is available under the brand name Plan B. It is more effective than the first type with a lower risk of nausea and vomiting. It reduces the risk of pregnancy 89 percent. Women should check with their physicians regard- ing the proper dose of pills to take, as it depends on the GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 9 Abo