le Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 includes a number of essays on alternative therapies, ranging from traditional Chinese medicine to homeopathy and from meditation to aromatherapy. In addition to full essays on alternative therapies, the encyclopedia features specific Alternative treatment sections for diseases and condi- tions that may be helped by complementary therapies. INCLUSION CRITERIA A preliminary list of diseases, disorders, tests and treat- ments was compiled from a wide variety of sources, including professional medical guides and textbooks as well as consumer guides and encyclopedias. The general advisory board, made up of public librarians, medical librarians and consumer health experts, evaluated the top- ics and made suggestions for inclusion. The list was sorted by category and sent to GEM2 medical advisors, certified physicians with various medical specialities, for review. Final selection of topics to include was made by the med- ical advisors in conjunction with the Gale Group editor. ABOUT THE CONTRIBUTORS The essays were compiled by experienced medical writers, including physicians, pharmacists, nurses, and other health care professionals. GEM2 medical advisors reviewed the completed essays to insure that they are appropriate, up-to-date, and medically accurate. HOW TO USE THIS BOOK The Gale Encyclopedia of Medicine 2 has been designed with ready reference in mind. • Straight alphabetical arrangement allows users to locate information quickly. • Bold-faced terms function as print hyperlinks that point the reader to related entries in the encyclopedia. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 IX INTRODUCTION • Cross-references placed throughout the encyclopedia direct readers to where information on subjects with- out entries can be found. Synonyms are also cross-ref- erenced. • A list of key terms are provided where appropriate to define unfamiliar terms or concepts. • Valuable contact information for organizations and support groups is included with each e