minal wall. Causes and symptoms There are many causes for birth defects that still remain unclear. Presently, the cause(s) of abdominal wall defects is unknown, and any symptoms the mother may have to indicate that the defects are present in the fetus are nondescript. Diagnosis At birth, the problem is obvious, because the base of the umbilical cord at the navel will bulge or, in worse cases, contain viscera (internal organs). Before birth, an ultrasound examination may detect the problem. It is always necessary in children with one birth defect to look for others, because birth defects are usually multiple. Treatment Abdominal wall defects are effectively treated with surgical repair. Unless there are accompanying anom- alies, the surgical procedure is not overly complicated. The organs are normal, just misplaced. However, if the defect is large, it may be difficult to fit all the viscera into the small abdominal cavity. Prognosis If there are no other defects, the prognosis after sur- gical repair of this condition is relatively good. However, KEY TERMS Hernia—Movement of a structure into a place it does not belong. Umbilical —Referring to the opening in the abdominal wall where the blood vessels from the placenta enter. Viscera—Any of the body’s organs located in the chest or abdomen. 10% of those with more severe or additional abnormali- ties die from it. The organs themselves are fully function- al; the difficulty lies in fitting them inside the abdomen. The condition is, in fact, a hernia requiring only replace- ment and strengthening of the passageway through which it occurred. After surgery, increased pressure in the stretched abdomen can compromise the function of the organs inside. Prevention Some, but by no means all, birth defects are pre- ventable by early and attentive prenatal care, good nutri- tion, supplemental vitamins , diligent avoidance of all unnecessary drugs and chemicals—especially tobacco— and other elements of a healthy lifestyle. Resource