& drainage Definition An infected skin nodule that contains pus may need to be drained via a cut if it does not respond to antibiotics. This allows the pus to escape, and the infection to heal. Purpose An abscess is a pus-filled sore, usually caused by a bacterial infection. The pus is made up of both live and dead organisms and destroyed tissue from the white blood cells that were carried to the area to fight the infec- tion. Abscesses are often found in the soft tissue under the skin, such as the armpit or the groin. However, they may develop in any organ, and are commonly found in the breast and gums. Abscesses are far more serious and call for more specific treatment if they are located in deep organs such as the lung, liver or brain. Because the lining of the abscess cavity tends to interfere with the amount of the drug that can penetrate the source of infection from the blood, the cavity itself may require draining. Once an abscess has fully formed, it often does not respond to antibiotics. Even if the antibiotic does penetrate into the abscess, it doesn’t func- tion as well in that environment. Precautions An abscess can usually be diagnosed visually, al- though an imaging technique such as a computed tomog- raphy scan may be used to confirm the extent of the abscess before drainage. Such procedures may also be needed to localize internal abscesses, such as those in the abdominal cavity or brain. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 15 Abcess incision & drainage Liver Stomach Spleen Colon Common sites of abscess above and below the liver Although abscesses are often found in the soft tissue under the skin, such as the armpit or the groin, they may develop in any organ, such as the liver.(Illustration by Electronic Illus- trators Group.) GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 15 Description A doctor will cut into the lining of the abscess, allow- ing the pus to escape either through a drainage tube or by leaving the cavity open to the skin. How big the incisi