ming (pyogenic) bacteria like Staphylococcus aureus, which is nearly always the cause of abscesses under the skin. Abscesses near the large bowel, particularly around the anus, may be caused by any of the numerous bacteria found within the large bowel. Brain abscesses and liver abscesses can be caused by any organism that can travel there through the circula- tion. Bacteria, amoeba, and certain fungi can travel in this fashion. Abscesses in other parts of the body are caused by organisms that normally inhabit nearby struc- tures or that infect them. Some common causes of specif- ic abscesses are: • skin abscesses by normal skin flora • dental and throat abscesses by mouth flora • lung abscesses by normal airway flora, pneumonia germs, or tuberculosis • abdominal and anal abscesses by normal bowel flora Specific types of abscesses Listed below are some of the more common and important abscesses. • Carbuncles and other boils. Skin oil glands (sebaceous glands) on the back or the back of the neck are the ones usually infected. The most common germ involved is Staphylococcus aureus . Acne is a similar condition of sebaceous glands on the face and back. • Pilonidal abscess. Many people have as a birth defect a tiny opening in the skin just above the anus. Fecal bac- teria can enter this opening, causing an infection and subsequent abscess. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 13 Abcess An amoebic abscess caused by Entameoba histolytica. (Phototake NYC. Reproduced by permission.) GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 13 • Retropharyngeal, parapharyngeal, peritonsillar abscess. As a result of throat infections like strep throat and tonsillitis, bacteria can invade the deeper tissues of the throat and cause an abscess. These abscesses can com- promise swallowing and even breathing. • Lung abscess. During or after pneumonia, whether it’s due to bacteria [common pneumonia], tuberculosis, fungi, parasites, or other germs, abscesses can develop as a complication. • Liver absc