otionally soon enough to have a first trimester abortion. Teens make up the largest group hav- ing second trimester abortions. Some second trimester abortions are performed as a D & E. The procedures are similar to those used in the first trimester, but a larger suction tube must be used because more material must be removed. This increases the amount of cervical dilation necessary and increases the risk of the procedure. Many physicians are reluctant to perform a D & E this late in pregnancy, and for some women is it not a medically safe option. The alternative to a D & E in the second trimester is an abortion by induced labor. Induced labor may require an overnight stay in a hospital. The day before the proce- dure, the woman visits the doctor for tests, and to either KEY TERMS Endocarditis —An infection of the inner mem- brane lining of the heart. Fibroid tumors —Fibroid tumors are non-cancer- ous (benign) growths in the uterus. They occur in 30-40% of women over age 40, and do not need to be removed unless they are causing symptoms that interfere with a woman’s normal activities. Lupus erythematosus —A chronic inflammatory disease in which inappropriate immune system reactions cause abnormalities in the blood vessels and connective tissue. Prostaglandin —Oxygenated unsaturated cyclic fatty acids responsible for various hormonal reac- tions such as muscle contraction. Rh negative —Lacking the Rh factor, genetically determined antigens in red blood cells that pro- duce immune responses. If an Rh negative woman is pregnant with an Rh positive fetus, her body will produce antibodies against the fetus’s blood, caus- ing a disease known as Rh disease. Sensitization to the disease occurs when the women’s blood is exposed to the fetus’s blood. Rh immune globulin (RhoGAM) is a vaccine that must be given to a woman after an abortion, miscarriage, or prenatal tests in order to prevent sensitization to Rh disease. have rods inserted in her cervix to help dilate it or to rec