ion, therapeutic Uterus Embryonic tissue Vagina Vulsellum Cervix Speculum Extraction tube Between 5 and 7 weeks, a pregnancy can be ended by a pro- cedure called menstrual extraction.The contents of the uterus are suctioned out through a thin extraction tube that is inserted through the undilated cervix. (Illustration by Elec- tronic Illustrators Group.) GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 10 term steroidal therapy, have bleeding abnormalities or on blood-thinners such as Coumadin. Surgical abortions First trimester surgical abortions are performed using vacuum aspiration. The procedure is also called dilation and evacuation (D & E), suction dilation, vacu- um curettage, or suction curettage. Advantages of a vacuum aspiration abortion are: • It is usually done as a one-day outpatient procedure. • The procedure takes only 10-15 minutes. • Bleeding after the abortion lasts five days or less. • The woman does not see the products of her womb being removed. Disadvantages include: • The procedure is invasive; surgical instruments are used. • Infection may occur. During a vacuum aspiration, the woman’s cervix is gradually dilated by expanding rods inserted into the cervical opening. Once dilated, a tube attached to a suc- tion pump is inserted through the cervix and the con- tents of the uterus are suctioned out. The procedure is 97-99% effective. The amount of discomfort a woman feels varies considerably. Local anesthesia is often given to numb the cervix, but it does not mask uterine cramping. After a few hours of rest, the woman may return home. Second trimester abortions Although it is better to have an abortion during the first trimester, some second trimester abortions may be inevitable. The results of genetic testing are often not available until 16 weeks. In addition, women, especially teens, may not have recognized the pregnancy or come to terms with it emotionally soon enough to have a first trimester abortion. Teens make up the largest group hav- ing s