to prevent sensitization to Rh disease. have rods inserted in her cervix to help dilate it or to receive medication that will soften the cervix and speed up labor. On the day of the abortion, drugs, usually prosta- glandins to induce contractions, and a salt water solution, are injected into the uterus. Contractions begin, and with- in eight to 72 hours the woman delivers the fetus. Side effects of this procedure include nausea, vomit- ing, and diarrhea from the prostaglandins, and pain from uterine cramps. Anesthesia of the sort used in childbirth can be given to mask the pain. Many women are able to go home a few hours after the procedure. Very early abortions cost between $200-$400. Later abortions cost more. The cost increases about $100 per week between the thirteenth and sixteenth week. Second trimester abortions are much more costly because they often involve more risk, more services, anesthesia, and sometimes a hospital stay. Insurance carriers and HMOs may or may not cover the procedure. Federal law pro- GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 2 11 Abortion, therapeutic GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 11 hibits federal funds including Medicaid funds, from being used to pay for an elective abortion. Preparation The doctor must know accurately the stage of a woman’s pregnancy before an abortion is performed. The doctor will ask the woman questions about her menstrual cycle and also do a physical examination to confirm the stage of pregnancy. This may be done at an office visit before the abortion or on the day of the abortion. Some states require a waiting period before an abortion can be performed. Others require parental or court consent for a child under age 18 to receive an abortion. Despite the fact that almost half of all women in the United States have had at least one abortion by the time they reach age 45, abortion is surrounded by controversy. Women often find themselves in emotional turmoil when deciding if an abortion is a procedure they wish t