ho experience any of the following symp- toms of post-abortion complications should call the clin- ic or doctor who performed the abortion immediately. • severe pain • fever over 100.4°F (38.2°C) • heavy bleeding that soaks through more than one sani- tary pad per hour • foul-smelling discharge from the vagina • continuing symptoms of pregnancy Normal results Usually the pregnancy is ended without complica- tion and without altering future fertility. Resources BOOKS Carlson, Karen J., Stephanie A. Eisenstat, and Terra Ziporyn. “Abortion.” In The Harvard Guide to Women’s Health. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1996. DeCherney, Alan H., and Martin L. Peroll. “Contraception and Family Planning.” In Current Obstetric and Gynecologic Diagnosis and Treatment.Norwalk, CT: Appleton & Lange, 1994. ORGANIZATION National Abortion Federation. (800) 772-9100. <http://www. prochoice.org>. Debra Gordon Abrasions see Wounds Abruptio placentae see Placental abruption Abscess Definition An abscess is an enclosed collection of liquefied tis- sue, known as pus, somewhere in the body. It is the result of the body’s defensive reaction to foreign material. GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 212 Abcess GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 12 Description There are two types of abscesses, septic and sterile. Most abscesses are septic, which means that they are the result of an infection. Septic abscesses can occur any- where in the body. Only a germ and the body’s immune response are required. In response to the invading germ, white blood cells gather at the infected site and begin producing chemicals called enzymes that attack the germ by digesting it. These enzymes act like acid, killing the germs and breaking them down into small pieces that can be picked up by the circulation and eliminated from the body. Unfortunately, these chemicals also digest body tissues. In most cases, the germ produces similar chemi- cals. The result is a thick, yellow liquid—pus—contain- ing digested