ur to perform and will cost a few hundred dollars or more, depending on the quality of the equipment, the operator and other fac- tors. More involved techniques such as multiple M-mode and Doppler-enhanced scans, or cases where the targets not well defined in advance, generally take more time and are more expensive. Regardless of the type of scan used and the potential difficulties encountered, ultrasound remains faster and less expensive than computed tomography scans (CT), its primary rival in abdominal imaging. Furthermore, as abdominal ultrasounds are generally undertaken as “medically necessary” procedures designed to detect the presence of suspected abnormalities, they are covered GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 24 Abdominal ultrasound GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 4 under most types of major medical insurance. As always, though, the patient would be wise to confirm that their coverage extends to the specific procedure proposed. For nonemergency situations, most underwriters stipulate prior approval as a condition of coverage. Specific conditions for which ultrasound may be selected as a treatment option—certain types of tumors, lesions, kidney stones and other calculi, muscle and lig- ament injuries, etc.—are described in detail under the appropriate entries in this encyclopedia. Preparation A patient undergoing abdominal ultrasound will be advised by their physician about what to expect and how to prepare. As mentioned above, preparations generally include fasting and arriving for the procedure with a full bladder, if necessary. This preparation is particularly use- ful if the gallbladder, ovaries or veins are to be examined. Aftercare In general, no aftercare related to the abdominal ultrasound procedure itself is required. Risks Abdominal ultrasound carries with it no recognized risks or side effects, if properly performed using appropri- ate frequency and intensity ranges. Sensitive tissues, par- ticularly those of the reproductive organs, co