nd procedure, diagnostic or therapeutic, may be hampered by a patient’s body type or other factors, such as the presence of excessive bowel gas (which is opaque to ultrasound). In particular, very obese people are often not good candidates for abdominal ultrasound. Description Ultrasound includes all sound waves above the fre- quency of human hearing—about 20 thousand hertz, or cycles per second. Medical ultrasound generally uses fre- quencies between one and 10 million hertz (1-10 MHz). GALE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MEDICINE 22 Abdominal ultrasound GEM - 0001 to 0432 - A 10/22/03 1:41 PM Page 2 KEY TERMS Accessory organ —A lump of tissue adjacent to an organ that is similar to it, but which serves no important purpose, if functional at all. While not necessarily harmful, such organs can cause prob- lems if they grow too large or become cancerous. In any case, their presence points to an underlying abnormality in the parent organ. Benign—In medical usage, benign is the opposite of malignant. It describes an abnormal growth that is stable, treatable and generally not life-threatening. Biopsy—The surgical removal and analysis of a tis- sue sample for diagnostic purposes. Usually, the term refers to the collection and analysis of tissue from a suspected tumor to establish malignancy. Calculus —Any type of hard concretion (stone) in the body, but usually found in the gallbladder, pan- creas and kidneys. They are formed by the accumu- lation of excess mineral salts and other organic material such as blood or mucous. Calculi (pl.) can cause problems by lodging in and obstructing the proper flow of fluids, such as bile to the intestines or urine to the bladder. Cirrhosis—A chronic liver disease characterized by the invasion of connective tissue and the degenera- tion of proper functioning—jaundice is often an accompanying symptom. Causes of cirrhosis include alcoholism, metabolic diseases, syphilis and conges- tive heart disease. Common bile duct —The branching passage through whic